Google OEM-specific events
Version 0.1

Within the OEM-specific namespace (0x80-0xFE) of the SMBIOS event log types, we define the following events. Any value within this namespace which does not have an event assigned is reserved for future assignment.

|| *Event ID* || *Meaning* ||
|| 0x80 || OS-generated Boot Log data ||
|| 0x81 || Crisis mode activated ||
|| 0x82 || NVRAM reset ||
|| 0x83 || Real-time clock reset ||
|| 0x84 || TCO watchdog timer reset ||
|| 0x85 || No boot media found ||
|| 0x86 || Thermtrip ||
|| 0x87 || Dimm Error Info ||


====Event 0x80 - OS-generated Event Log data====
{{{
    struct {
        uint8_t  reason;
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

The `reason` field indicates the kernel shutdown/reset reason.  Known values are:
   * 0x01 - Clean reset/boot
   * 0x02 - NMI watchdog event caused the kernel reset
   * 0x03 - OS panic
   * 0x04 - OS issues oops
   * 0x05 - OS die
   * 0x06 - OS software watchdog timeout
   * 0x07 - Multi bit ECC error
   * 0x08 - Triple fault

The `bootnum` field contains the sequential boot number of the boot being logged. 

====Event 0x81 - Crisis mode activated====
{{{
    struct {
        uint8_t  reason;
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

The `reason` field indicates the crisis mode activation reason.  Known values are:
   * 0x00 - Unknown
   * 0x01 - Activated by user with hardware (e.g. hardware switch or button)
   * 0x02 - Activated by user in software (e.g. selected thru BIOS configuration)
   * 0x03 - Firmware corruption detected
   * 0x04 - Boot target (bootloader or OS kernel) payload corruption detected

====Event 0x82 - Nvram cleared====
This OEM event indicates that firmware nvram is cleared.

{{{
    struct {
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

====Event 0x83 - RTC reset happened====
This OEM event indicates that a RTC reset had occurred

{{{
    struct {
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

====Event 0x84 - TCO watchdog timer reset====
This OEM event indicates that a TCO watchdog timer reset had occurred.

{{{
    struct {
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

====Event 0x85 - No boot media found====
This OEM event indicates that firmware fails to find a boot media such as PXE boot, USB boot device or HDD boot device. No payload is associated with this event except checksum.

{{{
    struct {
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

====Event 0x86 - Thermtrip====
This event indicates that emergency thermal protection was triggered in the system.

{{{
    struct {
        uint8_t type;
        uint16_t sourceid;
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t checksum;
     };
}}}

`type` field indicates the type of device that triggered thermal protection as follows:
|| *Type* || *Meaning* ||
|| 0x00 || Chipset ||
|| 0x01 || CPU ||
|| 0x02 || Unknown ||

`sourceid` field provides an index for the device (e.g. CPU package number).

====Event 0x87 - Dimm Error Info====
This event displays extended DIMM error information.  This event provides more information (if available) on DIMM errors such as training failure, membist failure etc.  This information is chipset/board specific. The payload of this error is defined as follows:

{{{
    struct {
        uint32_t dimmmap;
        uint8_t error_type;
        uint32_t bootnum;
        uint8_t  checksum;
    };
}}}

The `error_type` field indicates the the type of the error. The following table lists the defined errors:
|| *Type* | *Meaning* ||
|| 0x00 || Unknown ||
|| 0x01 || Training Failure ||
|| 0x02 || Coarse Delay Failure ||
|| 0x03 || memBIST Failed ||
|| 0x04 || Soft memtest Failed ||
|| 0x05 || Misc memory Failure ||